DB/MongoDB/readme.md, before:

1. Download MongoDB

2. Move the unzipped file to `Users/tf`

3. Rename it to a more friendly name e.g. mongodb

4. Create a new folder called `mongodb-data` where our databases data is going to be stored

5. ```bash
   cd ~
   pwd # copy output
   ___/mongodb/bin/mongod --dbpath=___/mongodb-data # ___ = copied from previous line
   ```

   A connection was opened on the mongodb default port 27017.

6. stuff was added to the folder `mongodb-data`. 

7. Download the mongodb GUI if necessary from [here](https://robomongo.org/download).

# CRUD operations

While the connection with mongodb is made:

```js
const { MongoClient, ObjectID } = require('mongodb');

const connectionURL = 'mongodb://127.0.0.1:27017'; // IP instead of localhost - works better
const documentName = 'some-name';

MongoClient.connect(connectionURL, { useNewUrlParser: true }, (err, client) => {
  // cb called when the connection to the db is made
  
  if(err) throw err;
  
	const db = client.db(documentName)
  
  // CREATE
  
  db.collection('users').insertOne({ // insert a document in the 'users' collection
    name: 'Tiago' 
  }, (err, result) => {
    if (err) throw err;
    
		console.log(result.ops); // { name: 'Tiago', _id: 24sdlkfhasldhg }
 		console.log(result.insertedCount); // 1
  });
  
  db.collection('users').insertMany([
    {
      name: 'Ze',
      surname: 'Xavier'
    },
    {
      name: 'Zeca',
      surname: 'Afonso'
    }
  ], (err, result) => {
    // same
  })
  
  // READ
  
  // by a normal field
  db.collection('users').findOne({ name: 'Tiago' }, (err, user) => {
    if (err) throw err;
    
    console.log(user);
  })
  
  // by id
  db.collection('users').findOne({ _id: new ObjectID("24sdlkfhasldhg") }, (err, user) => {
    if (err) throw err;
    
    console.log(user);
  })
  
  // many
  db.collection('users').find({ name: 'Tiago' }).toArray((err, users) => {
    console.log(users);
  })
  // many doesn't have a callback, but rather several methods to be called on e.g. toArray or count
  
  // UPDATE
  // one
  db.collection('users').updateOne(
    { name: 'Tiago' },
    { $set: { name: 'Xavier' } } // $set is one of the available update opertators, like $inc
  )
  	.then(result => console.log(result))
  	.catch(err => console.log(err));
  
  // many
  db.collection('users').updateMany({
    completed: false
  }, {
    $set: {
      update: true
    }
  }).then(...).catch(...);
  
  // DELETE
  // one
  db.collection('users').deleteMany({ name: 'Tiago' }).then(...).catch(...);
})
```



# Mongoose

Has a nice feature of building object models. These models are references for the structure to be used inside our database. It is, then, an ODM - Object Document Mapper, since it maps objects to documents. It is also possible to validate our documents (useful for emails, for example).

Connect mongoose to the database:

```js
//  src/db/mongoose.js

const mangoose = require('mangoose');

mongoose.connect('mongodb://127.0.0.1:27017/some-name', {
  useNewUrlParser: true,
  useCreateIndex: true
});
```



```js
//  user.js

const mangoose = require('mangoose');
const validator = require('validator'); // useful to validate users' inputs

const User = mongoose.model('User', {
  name: {
    type: String,
    default: 'Anonymous',
    trim: true
  },
  age: {
    type: Number,
    validate(val) {
      if (val < 0) throw new Error('Age must be a positive number')
    }
  },
  email: {
    type: String,
    required: true,
    validate(val) {
      if (!validator.isEmail(val)) throw new Error('Email is invalid')
    }
  }
});

module.exports = User;
```

As is visible in the code above, to create a model we use the `model` method of the mongoose library and give to it 2 arguments: a name for the model (User) and a schema of that object. If we would like to apply a middleware to this schema (e.g. to encrypt or hash the provided password), we should provide the to `model` the mongoose built-in Schema as the 2nd argument instead:

```js
const userSchema = new mongoose.Schema({
  name: ...,
  age: ...,
  email: ...
});

// use middleware here i.e. userSchema.pre or userSchema.post

const User = mongoose.model('User', userSchema)
```

There are some mongoose functions that bypass the middleware e.g. `findByIdAndUpdate`. Example of middleware implementation: 

```js
userSchema.pre('save', async function (next) { // cannot be arrow function to bind 'this'
  const user = this;
  if (user.isModified('password')) { // only hash password if it was created/modified
    user.password = await bcrypt.hash(user.password, 8);
  }
  
  next(); // signals the middleware has finished
})
```



To use this model:

```js
//  index.js

require('./db/mongoose.js'); // establish a connection to the database
const User = require('./models/user.js'); // get the User model

// notice how a new user is created by using the new keyword and passing in an object
const user = new User({
  name: 'Tiago',
  age: 29
})

// save the newly created user to the connected database
user.save()
  .then( () => console.log('saved') )
  .catch( err => console.log(err) );
```

Using with express:

```js
const app = express();

// GET
app.get('/users', (req, res) => {
  User.find({})
  	.then( users => res.send(users) )
  	.catch( () => res.status(500).send() );
});

app.get('users/:id', (req, res) => {
  const { id } = req.params;
  User.findById(id)
    .then( user => {
	    if (!user) return res.status(404).send();
    	res.send(user);
  	}).catch( () => res.send(500) );
})

// POST
app.use( express.json() );
app.post('/users', (req, res) => {
  const user = new User(req.body);
  user.save()
    .then( () => res.status(201).send(user) )
    .catch( e => res.status(400).send(e) );
  
  // UPDATE
  app.patch('/users/:id', async (req, res) => {
    const allowedParams = ['name', 'age', 'address'];
    const params = Object.keys(req.body);
    const isAllowed = params.every(param => allowedParams.includes(param));
    
    if(!isAllowed) return res.status(404).send({ error: 'Update not allowed.'});
    
    try {
      const user = await User.findByIdAndUpdate(req.params.id, req.body, { new: true, runValidators: true }); // *
      if (!user) return res.status(404).send()l
      res.send(user);
    } catch (e) {
      res.status(400).send(e);
    }
  })
  
  // DELETE
  app.delete('/users/:id', (req, res) => {
    try {
      const user = await User.findByIdAndDelete(req.params.id);
      if (!user) return res.status(404).send();
      res.send(user);
    } catch(e) {
      res.status(500).send(e);
    }
  })
});
```

\* This function bypasses middleware. If we were to write it in a way that wouldn't:

```js
const user = await User.findById(req.params.id);
allowedParams.forEach(param => user[update] = req.body[update] );
await user.save();
```



Notice that it is not necessary to convert the string id into an ObjectID, as it was for mongodb, since mongoose is doing that for us.

It is possible to chain promises with the mongoose api:

```js
User.findByIdAndDelete('sadkjhfgas')
  .then( user => User.countDocuments({}) ) // return another promise ( User.countDocumes )
	.then( result => console.log(result) )
	.catch( e => console.log(e) );
```

## Routing

Instead of calling all these endpoints on the app, it makes more sense to apply them in a dedicated route that will, in turn, be appended to the app. This can be achieved my doing the following:

```js
// routers/user.js

const User = require('../models/user');
const router = new express.Router();

router.create(...);
router.remove(...);
router.patch(...);
router.delete(...);

module.exports = router;
```



```js
// index.js
const userRouter = require('./routers/user.js');
app.use(userRouter);

// app.user(anotherRouter);
```

## Useful snippets

### Login

```js
router.post('/users/login', async (req, res) => {
  try {
    // findByCredentials is a custom method
    const user = await User.findByCredentials(req.body.email, req.body.password);
    res.send(user);
  } catch(e) {
    res.status(500).send();
  }
});

// models/user.js
userSchema.statics.findByCredentials = async (email, password) => {
  const user = await User.findOne({ email });
  if (!user) throw new Error('Login unsuccessful.');
  
  const isMatch = await bcrypt.compare(password, user.password);
  if(!isMatch) throw new Error('Login unseccessful.')
  
  return user;
}
```

Commit message:

added redis and updated mongo & node doc

DB/MongoDB/readme.md, after:

1. Download MongoDB

2. Move the unzipped file to `Users/tf`

3. Rename it to a more friendly name e.g. mongodb

4. Create a new folder called `mongodb-data` where our databases data is going to be stored

5. ```bash
   cd ~
   pwd # copy output
   ___/mongodb/bin/mongod --dbpath=___/mongodb-data # ___ = copied from previous line
   ```

   A connection was opened on the mongodb default port 27017.

6. stuff was added to the folder `mongodb-data`. 

7. Download the mongodb GUI if necessary from [here](https://robomongo.org/download).

# CRUD operations

While the connection with mongodb is made:

```js
const { MongoClient, ObjectID } = require('mongodb');

const connectionURL = 'mongodb://127.0.0.1:27017'; // IP instead of localhost - works better
const documentName = 'some-name';

MongoClient.connect(connectionURL, { useNewUrlParser: true }, (err, client) => {
  // cb called when the connection to the db is made
  
  if(err) throw err;
  
	const db = client.db(documentName)
  
  // CREATE
  
  db.collection('users').insertOne({ // insert a document in the 'users' collection
    name: 'Tiago' 
  }, (err, result) => {
    if (err) throw err;
    
		console.log(result.ops); // { name: 'Tiago', _id: 24sdlkfhasldhg }
 		console.log(result.insertedCount); // 1
  });
  
  db.collection('users').insertMany([
    {
      name: 'Ze',
      surname: 'Xavier'
    },
    {
      name: 'Zeca',
      surname: 'Afonso'
    }
  ], (err, result) => {
    // same
  })
  
  // READ
  
  // by a normal field
  db.collection('users').findOne({ name: 'Tiago' }, (err, user) => {
    if (err) throw err;
    
    console.log(user);
  })
  
  // by id
  db.collection('users').findOne({ _id: new ObjectID("24sdlkfhasldhg") }, (err, user) => {
    if (err) throw err;
    
    console.log(user);
  })
  
  // many
  db.collection('users').find({ name: 'Tiago' }).toArray((err, users) => {
    console.log(users);
  })
  // many doesn't have a callback, but rather several methods to be called on e.g. toArray or count
  
  // UPDATE
  // one
  db.collection('users').updateOne(
    { name: 'Tiago' },
    { $set: { name: 'Xavier' } } // $set is one of the available update opertators, like $inc
  )
  	.then(result => console.log(result))
  	.catch(err => console.log(err));
  
  // many
  db.collection('users').updateMany({
    completed: false
  }, {
    $set: {
      update: true
    }
  }).then(...).catch(...);
  
  // DELETE
  // one
  db.collection('users').deleteMany({ name: 'Tiago' }).then(...).catch(...);
})
```



# Mongoose

Has a nice feature of building object models. These models are references for the structure to be used inside our database. It is, then, an ODM - Object Document Mapper, since it maps objects to documents. It is also possible to validate our documents (useful for emails, for example).

Connect mongoose to the database:

```js
//  src/db/mongoose.js

const mangoose = require('mangoose');

mongoose.connect('mongodb://127.0.0.1:27017/some-name', {
  useNewUrlParser: true,
  useCreateIndex: true
});
```



```js
//  user.js

const mangoose = require('mangoose');
const validator = require('validator'); // useful to validate users' inputs

const User = mongoose.model('User', {
  name: {
    type: String,
    default: 'Anonymous',
    trim: true
  },
  age: {
    type: Number,
    validate(val) {
      if (val < 0) throw new Error('Age must be a positive number')
    }
  },
  email: {
    type: String,
    required: true,
    validate(val) {
      if (!validator.isEmail(val)) throw new Error('Email is invalid')
    }
  }
});

module.exports = User;
```

As is visible in the code above, to create a model we use the `model` method of the mongoose library and give to it 2 arguments: a name for the model (User) and a schema of that object. If we would like to apply a middleware to this schema (e.g. to encrypt or hash the provided password), we should provide the to `model` the mongoose built-in Schema as the 2nd argument instead:

```js
const userSchema = new mongoose.Schema({
  name: ...,
  age: ...,
  email: ...
});

// use middleware here i.e. userSchema.pre or userSchema.post

const User = mongoose.model('User', userSchema)
```

There are some mongoose functions that bypass the middleware e.g. `findByIdAndUpdate`. Example of middleware implementation: 

```js
userSchema.pre('save', async function (next) { // cannot be arrow function to bind 'this'
  const user = this;
  if (user.isModified('password')) { // only hash password if it was created/modified
    user.password = await bcrypt.hash(user.password, 8);
  }
  
  next(); // signals the middleware has finished
})
```



To use this model:

```js
//  index.js

require('./db/mongoose.js'); // establish a connection to the database
const User = require('./models/user.js'); // get the User model

// notice how a new user is created by using the new keyword and passing in an object
const user = new User({
  name: 'Tiago',
  age: 29
})

// save the newly created user to the connected database
user.save()
  .then( () => console.log('saved') )
  .catch( err => console.log(err) );
```

Using with express:

```js
const app = express();

// GET
app.get('/users', (req, res) => {
  User.find({})
  	.then( users => res.send(users) )
  	.catch( () => res.status(500).send() );
});

app.get('users/:id', (req, res) => {
  const { id } = req.params;
  User.findById(id)
    .then( user => {
	    if (!user) return res.status(404).send();
    	res.send(user);
  	}).catch( () => res.send(500) );
})

// POST
app.use( express.json() );
app.post('/users', (req, res) => {
  const user = new User(req.body);
  user.save()
    .then( () => res.status(201).send(user) )
    .catch( e => res.status(400).send(e) );
  
  // UPDATE
  app.patch('/users/:id', async (req, res) => {
    const allowedParams = ['name', 'age', 'address'];
    const params = Object.keys(req.body);
    const isAllowed = params.every(param => allowedParams.includes(param));
    
    if(!isAllowed) return res.status(404).send({ error: 'Update not allowed.'});
    
    try {
      const user = await User.findByIdAndUpdate(req.params.id, req.body, { new: true, runValidators: true }); // *
      if (!user) return res.status(404).send()l
      res.send(user);
    } catch (e) {
      res.status(400).send(e);
    }
  })
  
  // DELETE
  app.delete('/users/:id', (req, res) => {
    try {
      const user = await User.findByIdAndDelete(req.params.id);
      if (!user) return res.status(404).send();
      res.send(user);
    } catch(e) {
      res.status(500).send(e);
    }
  })
});
```

\* This function bypasses middleware. If we were to write it in a way that wouldn't:

```js
const user = await User.findById(req.params.id);
allowedParams.forEach(param => user[update] = req.body[update] );
await user.save();
```



Notice that it is not necessary to convert the string id into an ObjectID, as it was for mongodb, since mongoose is doing that for us.

It is possible to chain promises with the mongoose api:

```js
User.findByIdAndDelete('sadkjhfgas')
  .then( user => User.countDocuments({}) ) // return another promise ( User.countDocumes )
	.then( result => console.log(result) )
	.catch( e => console.log(e) );
```



## Query

Consider the following query:

```js
const query = Person
	.find({ ocupation: /engineer/ })
	.where('name.last').equals('Xavier')
	.where('age').gt(17).lt(66)
	.limit(10)
	.sort('-occupation')
	.select('name occupation')
```



There are 2 ways of getting the result from this query:

1. `const res = await query;`
2. `query.exec((err,res) => console.log(res))`



**Note**: A way to return cached data from Redis is to intercept the built-in Mongoose function `exec` and modify its normal behaviour (check if Redis key with data already exists: if so, return cache; otherwise return `exec`)



## Routing

Instead of calling all these endpoints on the app, it makes more sense to apply them in a dedicated route that will, in turn, be appended to the app. This can be achieved my doing the following:

```js
// routers/user.js

const User = require('../models/user');
const router = new express.Router();

router.create(...);
router.remove(...);
router.patch(...);
router.delete(...);

module.exports = router;
```



```js
// index.js
const userRouter = require('./routers/user.js');
app.use(userRouter);

// app.user(anotherRouter);
```

## Useful snippets

### Login

```js
router.post('/users/login', async (req, res) => {
  try {
    // findByCredentials is a custom method
    const user = await User.findByCredentials(req.body.email, req.body.password);
    res.send(user);
  } catch(e) {
    res.status(500).send();
  }
});

// models/user.js
userSchema.statics.findByCredentials = async (email, password) => {
  const user = await User.findOne({ email });
  if (!user) throw new Error('Login unsuccessful.');
  
  const isMatch = await bcrypt.compare(password, user.password);
  if(!isMatch) throw new Error('Login unseccessful.')
  
  return user;
}
```
